**Macroeconomics**

# 宏观经济学课程大纲

冯文成 

2023 年 2 月



### 时间地点 Time and Location

- Session I: IBC 英会 2201 Tuesday (5-7) from 13:00 pm to 15:25 pm at 203 书音; 
- Session II: IBC 英会 2202 Friday (2-4) from 8:50 am to 11:30 am at 203 书音;

### 授课教师 Instructor

- 冯文成 Feng Wencheng
- Email: fengwencheng66@163.com  
- Office: 512 师言阁
- Office hours: by appointment.

### 课程概述 Course Overview

Macroeconomics is the study of the economy as a whole, including growth in incomes, changes in prices, and the rate of unemployment. The objective of this course is to gain a formal understanding of macroeconomic topics such as what determines economic growth, what are the consequences of economic fluctuations, what are the short run and long run determinants of aggregate income, wages rates, exchange rates, inflation rates, interest rates, and unemployment rates, and what are the effect of the fiscal policy and monetary policy. In order to do this we will study the main concept and models that have been developed by macroeconomists to explain the behavior of economies and to investigate the implications of those models for policy-making decisions.

### 先修课程 Prerequisites

I assume that you have a basic understanding of microeconomic principles (Mankiw’s "*Ten Principles of Economics*"), basic algebra, and elementary calculus. 

### 课程目标Course Objectives

The goal of this course is to enable students to assess the macroeconomic environment in which a business operates. 

Upon successful completion of the course, the student should be able to demonstrate a basic understanding of news relating to the economy as a whole as reported in some publications; the economic implications of changes in government fiscal or monetary policy; how interest rates are determined and the role of interest rates in personal and corporate decision-making; and critically apply economic concepts when participating as a citizen in a democratic society. 

In particular, the students should be able to calculate equilibrium national income levels, calculate and use various multipliers, convert nominal values to real values, and use a graph to explain the impact of changes in fiscal and/or monetary policy on income and price levels. In addition, students should be able to use simple models of international trade to study the flow of goods between countries and discuss the costs of protectionism within the context of such models.

### 学时安排 Course Format

This class meets once every week and the whole course lasts 18 weeks. Students are

required to attend to every session and exam, which are not optional.

### 课程要求Course Requirements

Grads for this course will be based on participation and homeworks (30%) as well as a final exam (70%).

Regular attendance is essential to successfully completing this course. As such, I expect you to attend all of the lectures. If you need to miss a class, it is your responsibility to obtain all lecture notes and assignments from one of your classmates.

Please arrive on time to class and please silence all cell phones. 

Texting during class is discouraged since it often distracts other students. 

Do not start getting your bags together before the end of class, it makes it hard for others to hear the end of class comments.

### 教材选用 Textbook

- The required textbook:
  1. Mankiw, N. G.: *PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS* (6th , 9th Ed.) 曼昆《经济学原理:宏观部分》第 *6* 或 *9* 版(用英文版)

- Reference, not required:

  1. Mankiw, N. G.: *Macroeconomics* (9th , 10th Ed.) 曼昆《宏观经济学》第 *9* 或 *10* 版

  2. Olivier Blanchard, Macroeconomics (7th , 8th Ed.)布兰查德《宏观经济学》第 *7* 或 *8* 版

  3. 马克思主义理论研究和建设工程重点教材《西方经济学:下册(宏观部分)》

- The first reference book is, to date, the best-selling undergraduate macroeconomics textbook – for good reason in my opinion. While not perfect, Mankiw does an admirable job of explaining the key macroeconomic concepts and theories without overwhelming the reader with mathematics. 

  Unfortunately, . . .

### 课程内容Course Outline

This is a tentative schedule that can change. We’ll study chapter 23**、**24**、**25、26、28、29、30、33、34、35 in a little diffrent orders with the textbook. 

#### MODULE 1 Introduction and Macroeconomic Data .

In this first module, we will prepare ourselves for the semester by reviewing the course syllabus and policies, discussing the broad questions that macroeconomics aims to answer or address, and (re-)familiarizing ourselves with the key data of macroeconomics. We will review the definitions and methods for calculating Gross Domestic Product, the Consumer Price Index, and Unemployment.

- **lec00 Introduction**

  -  What Macroeconomists Study  

  - How Economists Think 

  - How This Book Proceeds

- **ch23 Measurement of National Income**
  - Gross Domestic Product
- **ch24 Measurement of Cost of Living**
  -  The Consumer Price Index  
  - The Unemployment Rate

#### MODULE 2. Long Run Economy, Money and Prices

Module 2 introduces the Classical Theory of Macroeconomics, which focuses on the econ- omy in the long run. This “long run”refers to the time horizon over which all prices are flexible. We will begin by developing the basic classical model of national income. We will then intro- duce money and prices into this model of the economy. Successful completion of this module will enable the student to explain the functions of money, evaluate the policies of the CB’s monetary policy, understand the causes of inflation, explain classical dichotomy and money neutrality.

- **ch26 Saving, Investment, and the Financial System (The National Income: Where it comes from and where it goes)**

  - What Determines the Total Production of Goods and Services?

  - How is National Income Distributed to the Factors of Production?

  - What Determines the Demand for Goods and Services?

  - What Brings the Supply and Demand for Goods and Services Into Equilibrium?

- **Chapter 28 Unemployment and Its Natural Rate**

  -  Job Loss, Job Finding, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment  

  - Job Search and Frictional Unemployment

  - Real-Wage Rigidity and Structural Unemployment

- **Chapter 29 The Monetary System: What It Is and How It Works**

  -  What Is Money?

  - The Role of Banks in the Monetary System

  - How Central Banks Influence the Money Supply

- **Chapter 30 Money Growth and Inflation**

  - The Quantity Theory of Money

  - Seigniorage

  - Inflation and Interest Rates

  - The Nominal Interest Rate and the Demand for Money  The Social Costs of Inflation

  - Hyperinflation

#### Module 3. Growth Theory: The Very Long Run

In Module 3, we will build on the Classical Model of Macroeconomics by introducing a dynamic component. This will allow us to discuss economic growth. We will begin by developing the Solow Growth Model in Week 1. This model sheds some light on how the economy evolves (or grows) over time. In Week 2, we will introduce technological progress into the Solow Growth Model. As we will discuss, technological progress is the key to economic growth.

- **Chapter 25-a. Production and Growth**

  - The Accumulation of Capital

  - The Golden Rule Level of Capital  Population Growth

- **Chapter 25-b. Production and Growth**

  - Technological Progress in Solow Model

  - From Growth Theory to Growth Empirics

  - Policies to Promote Growth

  - Beyond the Solow Model: Endogenous Growth Theory

#### Module 4. Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

In Module 4, we will study the short run. The “short run”is defined as the time horizon over which (at least, some) prices in the economy are sticky. We will begin by reviewing some key facts that describe short-run fluctuations in economic activity. In Weeks 2 and 3, we will develop and examine Aggregate Demand. Aggregate Demand represents all spending in the economy. We will study the “Keynesian Cross”and discuss liquidity preferences to build the IS-LM Model. We will then employ this IS-LM Model to explain short-run economic fluctuations. Finally, in Week 5, we will discuss Aggregate Supply. This will allow us to investigate the potential short-run trade-off between unemployment and inflation.

- **Chapter 33 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply Introduction to Economic Fluctuations**

  -  The Facts About the Business Cycle  

  - Time Horizon in Macroeconomics

  - Aggregate Demand

  - Aggregate Supply

  - Stabilization Policy

- **Chapter 34a The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand Building the** IS − LM **Model**

  -  The Goods Market and the IS Curve  

  - The Money Market and the LM Curve  

  - The Short-Run Equilibrium

- **Chapter 34b The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand: Applying the** IS − LM **Model**

  - Explaining Fluctuations With the IS − LM Model  

  - IS − LM Model as a Theory of Aggregate Demand  

  - The Great Depression

- **Chapter 35 The Short-Run Tradeoff between Inflation and Unemployment (and Aggregate Supply)**

  - The Basic Theory of Aggregate Supply

  - Inflation, Unemployment, and the Philips Curve

